Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Coley Moore, and I want to thank everybody for listening as I always do and ask that you please subscribe to the podcast if you haven't and share the podcast. Also, a five-star iTunes rating is phenomenal. Thank you so much for all of those and your reviews. They are very funny and we really, really appreciate the sentiment. Also, we really, really appreciate the donations, which you can make at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And we've gotten some really nice ones in the last month, month and a half, and I just want to say thank you.
Thank you so much to everybody who is donating to the show. We really, really, really, really appreciate it.
coaching or consultation inquiries. So coaching, obviously you work with me or an empirical cycling coach and we are always taking on athletes. So feel free to reach out. And if you want a consultation, we'll look at whatever questions you've got for training, looking at your programming, big picture, small picture. We will answer all of your questions if we possibly can. So you can contact me for that. That's empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And also if you have any questions on the show, if you have any inquiries or comments, just
Email me, same address, or you can check me out on Instagram at Empirical Cycling, as you might have expected, where I also do weekend AMAs on training in the Instagram stories, sometimes during the week from the gym as well. So give me a follow over there. And also we have a little bit of fun new merch at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com. So that's all our typical stuff. So now let's get into this episode. So what are we doing here?
So today we are going to be talking to Ingvar Omarsson who is a great Icelandic cyclist and he is a coaching client of mine, has been for about a year and
this is we always have a really good rapport I think and we always have a good conversation and he reached out to me because of the podcast and so I thought it might be cool to do one of our normal season review and next season planning calls as a podcast I asked him last call that we had he said he thought it would be a good idea and a lot of fun and so here we are so this is really just a normal call that we have and we
Kind of forgot that we were recording and I thought it might be cool for people to hear kind of what goes on behind the scenes for planning a pro cyclist season and kind of reviewing the season that had happened previously. So if you want to check Ingvar out, you can probably check him out at ProCyclingStats and you can check him out on Instagram. I'm going to tag him. Ingvar, thank you so much for coming on the show and I hope everybody listening is going to enjoy the call and I'll see you on the other side of it.
Let's get back to cycling for a minute. Yeah, let's do that. So I was looking at your 2020 to 2021 build a little earlier today. And one of the things that I noticed difference between then and now is you had been riding quite a bit by now last year, where this year, you know, we're taking a, it's a slower build.
Well, I mean, at this point, it's, let's put it this way, there's not as much riding because we're trying to get you into the gym, which was not possible at this time last year. So, you know, thinking about just that contrast, you know, last season's build, like aerobically, like, so let's compartmentalize the, you know, the sprint thing, which
We had intended to work on, and the isometrics and stuff I was giving you, they weren't as effective as I was hoping. So let's compartmentalize between that and the aerobic stuff. So how was the aerobic stuff, in your opinion, for most of last year? For the last season? Yeah, yeah, sorry, last season. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, I mean...
Just to start with, I mean, last year when we were starting to work together, I was doing my typical just continue writing into the winter kind of thing, you know? So what we're doing right now is completely new to me. So I have to admit, I have never been an off-season guy.
I've got so many feelings about this. I mean, I haven't lost fitness in this way ever. So, well, not, not like, not intentionally. I had a motorbike hit me pretty hard in late 2015. And I think that's my only off season until now. So, but I think to answer your question aerobically, I have never been better.
I felt I could do everything for a longer period of time than before. You know, we raised the FTP, we got most of the things above, say, one minute to a completely new level. So that felt pretty good. I felt like I could do things.
Yeah, for much longer than before. And I think that the race, do you remember that race I did, the local race over here, I did in late July. And I pretty much soloed off the front after two kilometers. It wasn't the rift. It was around that time. It was a little before then, right? I think it was the weekend before or after. I can't remember which. Before, I think.
and I did this two hours 40 minutes by myself and that was just like the longest time trial I've ever done and it was perfect and I did like numbers I could never believe I could do so I think this season has been filled with very positive surprises about what I can do on the bike so that has been great like that has been the
The biggest positive point of the season for me. Yeah, and I think, you know, one of the nice things about, you know, the type of training that you did last winter, like leading into the season is what I find with people is that it's as long as, you know, once you make those adaptations, as long as you're getting in the volume, you
mostly get back to that same level. Then a handful of intervals, by a handful I mean a month or two's worth of work, you get back to that level and then you can maintain it fairly easily. So I think that's a good kind of base for this season because initially you would ask me to help you with your sprint because your starts for cross-country and marathon needed work.
You've got some good watts and we just needed to get you in the gym. So the gym is being closed down. Yeah, they got him. Yeah, I mean, of course, you know, we can't always have a perfect season. So this was definitely something I missed from last winter. Like when we were starting off, I was...
I was getting really excited about, you know, doing more gym and more strength and stuff like that. And it was this constant disappointment with like COVID closing the gym all the time. Like we over here, we had we had this back and forth with, you know, the government setting new rules about, you know, COVID related things.
they kept like opening the gym and then a few days later they would close it because obviously that wasn't working and they would have it closed for maybe two or three weeks and then they would go like oh yeah let's let's try that again and it would work for a few days and it would just go on like this throughout the whole winter and there was just no way for me to to do anything while this was going on so
Definitely something that obviously didn't really go to plan or expectations. Well, do you have a – I don't know as much – actually, I know next to nothing about the Icelandic national governing sports kind of structure. But is there like a national training facility that if you had –
more federal support like you would be able to use or is that not a thing in Iceland? We don't have it but I've seen something like this like in Denmark they have this really cool facility that is mostly I think is mostly meant for people who are like at an Olympic level and
You know, like national teams and really limited access, but like full access for the absolute top people of the sport. And it's not for not only for cycling, but it's for for everybody. But we don't have anything like that over here. You know, some of our some of our bigger sports like, you know, football, well, European football, soccer, stuff like that.
They have their own facilities. Short answer is no. I was just curious because we have the Olympic Training Center here in Colorado Springs and I was just wondering if there was an analog because I remember last time we talked you had mentioned that now that you're ranked top 50 in the UCI rankings that
that your national governing body is taking a little more notice and that might actually translate to a little more support this year. So that's kind of why I was asking that. I wanted to see if you're going to be able to go to a race and actually have somebody hand you up a bottle so you don't have to do two bottles in five hours again. Well, I could say that we're working on it. It's something that has been getting more attention than previously.
especially since apparently I've reached a level where support is now limiting me more than ever. I'm definitely there where if I would have more support, I would definitely be doing better. There's no question about that anymore. So that is something that is being worked on. But yeah, we haven't really...
We haven't really figured it out yet, but I hope for the best. Yeah, that's unfortunate. I mean, if I were in Europe, I would definitely come to your races and hand you models and help rent. Well, I would have to learn how to wrench on mountain bikes, but then I would, and then I would help you with all that kind of stuff. That would be a lot of fun. I do love mountain bike races. Yeah, they're so fun, and you would enjoy it the whole time.
I pretty much enjoy every race I go to. I just feel at home there. My girlfriend's dad saw me at GMSR, and after knowing me as a quiet person who's staring at a computer all day, he was like, wow, Cole really seemed like he was in his element at a bike race. I was like, yes, I am. That is a great thing. Yeah, it is.
Yeah, okay, so this year, so let's stick on the aerobic thing for a little bit. Because I had planned on giving you more lifting pretty much until, well actually, let me take a look at your schedule. So we've got the two stage races coming up in late January. So, oh, Costa Blanca, I know that one.
So how's your priority level on these? Is this more of a training thing? Because I imagine you're more focused on Andalusia and the Worlds and World Cups and things like that. Yeah, well, actually, I've put up a lot of races.
I haven't really decided which ones I'm going to do like these are there are plenty of races there and I would like to do at least either one of those late January races I did both of those this year or last season actually I did like Lanzarote, Casablanca, Andalusia I did all of them and because of COVID they were
pretty late in the season and now they're back to their usual dates. So Casablanca, that was my last race of last season. So it's actually pretty early. It's only two months between doing the same race. Andalusia definitely would be the bigger goal of those races. It is ranked
as HC right now. So it's pretty much the same ranking as something like Cape Epic. Oh, yeah, yeah. Okay. Just plenty of points there. Like, yeah. It's a really good race to do and really good training for the rest of the season. Okay. One second. I want to update my notes file on this. Yeah. Let's see.
Yeah, actually, because I think if Andalusia is the target for early season fitness, I think actually that puts us in a really good spot because I think that the January races are a little too close because by that point, I think you're not going to be able to be in decent shape given the break that you've had. But this is kind of one of the challenges of being a pro and having a busy schedule. I mean, I think you're lucky in that you get to choose your own schedule.
Andalusia is going to be a good early season target. Yeah, I think so too. Of course, there are some good things and bad things about being a privateer, but this is definitely one of the good ones. I am definitely a square when it comes to planning things.
I'm probably simplifying things way too much, but I really like the idea of doing training first and then racing. I have a really hard time putting a race right in the middle of a training season. I keep reminding myself of that VO2max block we did in last January, which is definitely...
Both my favorite training block of all time and the hardest thing I've ever done over a period of three weeks. It was insane, but I felt so good afterwards. So that is the thing. I'm struggling to figure out where would we put that into next year if I'm looking at these races. Well, exactly. And that's one of the hard.
I think if we take out Lanzarote and Casablanca, here's the other thing is we don't necessarily have to do another block like that. Or it would be okay to do like a week or two because to have that stimulus to bring your threshold up to the next level even,
would require even more training beforehand and then even more recovery afterwards because the block would be similarly hard or even a little harder. Now that we know that you can actually take that training load, now that you've done it, I think you'd be able to knock it out of the park going up to the next level with that stuff, which is adding another workout or two per week with the same 20 to 25 hours of riding. Wow.
Yeah, I've had two guys do that and they came out the other side really fit and the same thing happened with them that happened with you is you can maintain that level through the season as long as you're resting and just getting in the easy volume. Yeah, that's it. And so I think with
That's one of the things to balance for this season too is now that the gyms are open, what's the aerobic balance versus the anaerobic balance? Because for working on your high-end power and getting into the gym, a three-week VO2 max block is not going to be conducive to staying in the gym because as you know, that's a hard block and you need every ounce of recovery that you can get. Yeah, I would not spend a minute in a gym doing that block.
There's no way. I remember I was having a hard time eating. I was sitting at one point on the sofa looking at a pizza, like my favorite food in the entire world, and I was struggling to motivate myself to get that thing into my mouth. I was just thinking, what? Where am I?
What happened? I was just so tired. I'm glad you didn't tell me that during the block because I would have had you pull it back a little bit. There's no way I'm telling you that. Actually, actually strike that out. Just forget it. I did not hear that. Yes. No. I mean, yeah, it's just that block definitely showed me where my limits are.
But as I said, I'm really curious about seeing where I can reach my anaerobic limitations or whatever we would call it. That is something I really want to improve.
I have three different things open. I have the calendar, I have training peaks and WKO5. We're all over the place right now. Yeah. Well, I think looking at the next couple of weeks, doing a little, so this week it's going to get a little heavier in the gym and then it'll kind of stay similarly heavy probably through the end of the year. And then going into January,
possibly going down to once a week but since we'll see what kind of you know time you have between writing and being a father of how's your daughter by the way she's great yeah she is next week she will be five months old
Now, is there a, I don't know the development timeline of babies because I've had not spent that much time around them, but is that like a, is that the walking phase or is that the just pooping and wide eyed phase? Definitely pooping and wide eyed phase and so much more, but she, so, so yeah, to give you an idea, she is recently started rolling over. Like she, she's lying down all the time.
She doesn't have the strength to sit up, but she can roll around and she can stay on her stomach. Stuff like that. She's not crawling. Oh, that's so great. Just about to get there. We are waiting in fear and anticipation of that happening. There are things to get excited about.
All the other parents go like, yeah, once they start crawling, then it's just, ah, it's the worst. They will crawl up everything. They will crawl everywhere. And, yeah, it's just scary. But, of course, we're excited. So, yeah, we're still a few months away from her, you know, being able to stand up and walk. But she'll get there. Yeah. Okay, cool.
Alright, so here's what I'm thinking is once we get to your daughter's crawling phase more or less, we'll have an option to bring the gym work down to once a week and really start your aerobic build because I think about from January 1st through the end of February would be a good timeline for a pretty good build.
I don't think we're going to get you in your absolute best shape, but I think we can get you in some very, very good shape. Yeah. And then, you know, between that and... Oh, yeah. What's up? Yeah. If I can throw in a thing. Like, I was doing my own review of, like, last season, and I have this feeling that I, like, I was getting into shape really quickly.
We did those tests in December and it was okay. And then we did some tests in, I think, February after that VO2max block. And that's where I saw numbers. Previously, I would have only done those numbers in season, like at my absolute best. So I already felt like I was surpassing my earlier best ever fitness.
I think like I have a feeling I got I had my best fitness a bit too early. Like I, you know, I was doing I was doing some amazing things in the spring. And I kind of feel like I wasn't doing those things anymore in the summer, like June and July. I felt something missing. So, yeah, well, here's here's because I looked at your season a lot.
both in season and recently with a little more fresh eyes and here's what I think happened is your training load went down so the amount of volume that you had been able to do early January was you know extremely large and then your average kind of weekly training volume had gone down because it goes down for two reasons because first you're recovering from the races and second
You just don't have that much time to train, especially once you told me with three days notice that you were going to be a father. No, it was a week. You're right, it was a week. It was a week. I mean, who needs more than a week? I will admit to one thing, I had this constant feeling of if I told you earlier, you would start toning things down.
No, I would have wrapped it up. I would have been like, this is the last chance you got. Okay, well, I mean, but honestly, up until the point where we had the baby, I wasn't really toning down anything at all. I can say it wasn't really having any effect on my writing until, you know, it actually happened.
That's true, yeah, you're right But I do think that all the racing, of course, it meant that I had fewer hours of training, stuff like that Yeah, and that was the biggest thing that I saw was a difference, especially early season because you were so fatigued after your early season races in Spain that I couldn't, with good conscience, give you a ton of
Long Rides. And then once we got into season, that was, I think, one of the biggest things that was really holding you back is just not being able to get in that much volume or even just kind of maintenance intervals, which I really tried to get in as much as possible. And then, you know, it actually happens to a lot of people where they hit some good fitness and then if they can, you know, get the training back in.
they can reach that same fitness level again and I think that's one of the reasons why I was I kept saying to you repeatedly last season like I hope next season you can race a little less because I know that we could get your form a little better because we would see that happen with your time trial like you know you could do you know 395, 405 watts, 410 ish
And then when you fatigued, it was down to the 370 range, 380s. And then as you did more long riding and you freshened back up, it would come back up. So I think those were the multiple factors that were kind of working against us in season last year. Yeah, I think you're right. I mean, yeah, obviously when you look at it, then I had that dip in early June.
like after Spain and it cost me a national title in time trialing. So that was, that was frustrating. Um, that was, uh, yes, really frustrating when, when the one bad time trial of the year is the national champs. Um, but obviously I'm going to get it again, so no problem, but, um, yeah, there's a lot of confidence, but, uh, but of course,
Also, I am motivated by losing a race like that. Every time I lose a race in Iceland, I get an extra kick of motivation. So all of this helps. But looking back, there was definitely this dip in fitness or form or whatever. I just felt tired throughout June. I actually felt...
I was lucky to get to win the road nationals because that was like right after right after that period I was still feeling pretty tired by that point but I still got the race so I was happy about that but after after that I think in July things started to get better so yeah yeah no I I completely agree and I'm looking at your June right now and you know as a you know one of the
National TT Series race, Blue Lagoon, TT Nats, Road Nats. I mean, there was – oh, and also I think – what was it? Did we have a call? Was it mid-Andalusia or was it mid-Club Santa stage race? I think it was La Santa, yeah. Yeah, because I remember –
This was my mistake because I really should have done some due diligence on this because I just assume – sorry for how this comes across. I just assume somebody at your level knows how much to eat on the bike. And I asked you how much you were eating and you were like – it was like three gels for a long stage. And I told you the next day to eat 100 grams an hour and keep that up.
And then was it two or three days later, you got your first UCI podium? Yeah, I mean, yeah, I will, I will freely admit that was something I did not know enough about. Like, I think I think in my defense, I have gotten used to winning races with nothing in my stomach at home. And I kind of tend to make that same mistake when I'm at much bigger races.
So that was a very good wake-up call for me. Like most of the races I did in the fall, like those October-November races, I had my jersey pockets packed with gels in all of those races. And yeah, of course, I felt much better. So that was a really good thing. Obviously, I should have known more about it, but it's never too late to learn.
Yeah, I agree. And I'm glad I asked you. And actually, I think it was, I think I was, I think it was grousing about something to Katie and she was like, you know, just ask him everything, like warm up, food, water, everything, like don't leave no stone unturned. And I did. And, you know, it turned out to be, you know, the thing that we were missing. Yeah. Yeah. And so, man. Oh, yeah.
Between that and then getting into the later season, what I'm seeing is that you were doing a lot more higher volume rides. Because I think after Road Nash, you did Cyclothon, and then you did a 23-hour week, then you did a 17-hour week, and then a 20-hour week.
I had 20 hour week planned. I think you got most of it done. And then with the rift, you know, that was another 20 hours, 18 hours. So like, so the, so the volume started to go back up and then your fitness started to go back up too. So I think, you know, I think that kind of goes into how you were feeling good later in the season. Oh yeah, definitely. Once I had that good feeling, like I can't remember when it was, maybe late June or early July, you were, you started.
You started scheduling more of those longer interval rides, like, you know, 18-20 minutes intervals, stuff like that, like steady state threshold stuff. I was really beginning to enjoy that stuff, like doing those really long ones. And I just had a good feeling after a bad month in June. So, of course, that helped me.
Get that volume back up. I just felt in June, there was just no way for me to do that. I just had to recover. I had to rest. So, yeah, in July, that was a really good month. I felt really good, especially with a race like the Rift. I would definitely say that was one of the standout races of the season. Yeah, yeah, I completely agree. That was a...
That was a great race. I was really hoping you were going to win, but I think second's not bad, considering who you're up against. Yeah, I mean, racing against Pete at home soil. I mean, I've done two races with Pete Sedna, Dirty Cancer 2019, where I finished, I think, two hours or three hours or four hours behind him. And then I did the rift and I finished like 24 seconds behind him.
Definitely a good feeling. But I have to say, I saw this article on Cycling News the day after, or something like that, and they were listing all these races he'd been winning. He'd been winning pretty much everything in the US at that point. And I thought, oh man, I could have been the guy to end that streak.
He went to Iceland and his winning streak was broken by some local dude Hopefully this year Yeah, I mean, I've got second, I've got third so obviously first is all I need right now but yeah, I mean getting second in that race felt better than every single gold medal I had in other races
in Iceland so it just felt so good to be close to a real professional like Pete like I on paper I would I would like because we talked about confidence earlier that is definitely something I need confidence to do I felt that like a year or two earlier I probably would have gone into that race not even
thinking if I should be trying to race against those guys, I would be racing behind them. But for this race, I was thinking, no, no, no. I'm going to win this race. I don't care if I have to beat Pete Stetna or Colin or whatever. I'm just going to try and win this race. So it really helped to have that confidence.
That type of racing, you've done it a lot locally on the road and gravel type races. But I think that's also one of the things that going into Euro Road Champs that...
It's a similar type of racing to that where it's like you're in a bunch but in Euros obviously it doesn't stratify out quite as much as in a gravel race where it typically does but it's a similar type of tactics that I think that you through the season I think showed better and better confidence in. I think you won road nats out of a bunch sprint I think, right? Yeah. And you said that was unusual for you in Iceland. Yeah, that was
I might be wrong, but I think before that, I think I won a race out of a bunch sprint. I don't know, 2017? 16, 17, something like that. It's been years. I usually win solo. There's no particular reason for that. It's just something that happens.
As time passes, I kind of tend to avoid sprinting for the only reason that I just don't do it anymore. It's like you do something less and less and you get more scared of actually trying it out again. So I just get used to trying to win a race by going off alone. But in that race, yeah.
It felt really good winning a bunch of sprints because I had come to believe that I couldn't do it anymore just because I don't really do that. And every race where we had talked before and you were thinking about, oh, maybe I'll sharpen up my bunch racing skills in this one. I would look at the file and we wouldn't talk about it yet and you hadn't commented on it yet. And I would look at it and think...
What happened? There's no sprint at the end. Is he all right? Yeah, I mean, I don't know. When you get the opportunity, it's hard to pass on it, you know, to go. It is true. I mean, I was a sprinter myself when I was racing, and, you know, on the track, the sprint is like, you know, it's coming within several seconds, whether you like it or not. And on the road, it's really a game of patience.
That is one of the hardest things to do, especially if you know, oh, I could probably get off the front. And it's like, you know, do you go off the front early and, you know, guarantee that you're going to win this race? Or do you have patience and think, I need to work on this skill, so I need to, you know, practice surfing the pack and practice negotiating the bun sprint and stuff like that. So it's, I agree, it's hard. And if I...
If I had your aerobic engine, I probably would be doing the same thing as you. So I'm nobody to judge. You know, other than it's one of those things where it just takes a lot of experience. And it took me like probably three years of, you know, sucking up on sprints before I really started to get a hang of it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah, it's just a lot of experience you need and confidence in your mobility. So, but I think.
I think in my case, it's also a little bit of feeling like being not afraid to do something differently. Like I figured out a way to do things and it works almost every time, but it's always the same. So I think every now and then it would be good to just do something differently, see what happens.
But of course, that is something that you need to be ready to do. And I think to a point, I wasn't really ready to do that, even though I wanted to. So when the day came, when the race came, we would do these early season races and there would be moments where I could see that, yeah, I could go off the front now and just leave.
And I just couldn't pass on it. Like I wasn't ready to say to myself, no, no, let's try to win the sprint. Let's do that instead. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that is the bike racing gambling game that we're taught, you know, it's reduce your odds or sorry, increase your odds as you go. If you're one of 50 at the start, you want to be one of five or less at the end or one of one.
Exactly. It's better, right? I mean, and everybody wants to be Fabian Cancelara just riding away from the best in the world, you know? Yeah, yeah. Who doesn't want to do a 2011 Tour of Planters? Like, just, you know, ride off everybody, ride through breakthroughs, breakaways, ride through everybody, like they're not there. Well, remember one of his last monument wins, he won out of a reduced bunch print of four.
Sitting down. Yeah, he had the patience of, I'm going to wait, I'm going to wait, I'm going to wait, I'm going to wait. It was an amazing sprint. It was just so cool. And he started that sprint. He got off when nobody was looking. And I think that was what won it for him. Yeah, it absolutely was. It was amazing. Well, that's one of those things. He's got that experience.
He's dragged people to the line before, but I bet he was like, I've been working on my sprinting, I've been working on my high end, I bet I have more in the tank than these other guys right now, despite the fact that on paper, I may not be the best sprinter here No, but you could just see it in his reaction, his celebration, you could see that he was not really expecting to win the sprint, like he wasn't super confident about it
He was celebrating like it was his first ever win. It was amazing. It wasn't really like him, so that just made it even better. I agree. That's probably my favorite win of his. Yes, one of the best. Okay, anyway, so back to your program. Let's see. Yes. Okay, so one of the things that I like about
I know there's going to be local races and stuff peppered in here, but I really like that you've got a pretty big break between March and April. So early March with Aragon and then all the way down in mid-April. That's a pretty good span of time to rest and then get in more training. Yeah, I was looking at early March.
I'm leaning a little bit towards going for a training camp instead of a race that race I found there it's nice but to me I think it's I don't really want to do a race just to do a race you know it's right now I am I feel very fortunate to have
a really good position on the world rankings and what is really good about that is that most of those points that make up that ranking are from late season not early so I'm not going to be losing any of those points until after the summer which gives me a feeling of being a little bit more how do you say
Easy. I feel, you know, more relaxed about points collection. So just doing a race to collect a few points. I don't know. I would like to do more training instead of that race. If that sounds good. I think it does, you know, because I think that, you know, between Andalusia and then training camp,
You know, you come back in March, I think depending on how you're feeling with recovery and all that, that would be a good chance to do, you know, maybe a two week VO2 max block, then a little rest and then training up to your next training camp where we can focus on more threshold type stuff. And then that brings us into into May. And then that means that you're going to have a good chance to
Maintain Your Fitness. You've got a much more sparsely populated schedule this year. I'm following your advice. I'm trying really hard not to put in too much racing. I'm trying to think quality, not quantity.
You were watching this season as much as I was. Woot's season this year was phenomenal, but I think he could have racked up a couple more wins if he wasn't racing so much and he got just a little bit of chance to recover a little more. Yeah, I bet that's right. I'm just guessing. I'm not his coach. He's obviously that good that...
Even when he's probably feeling pretty fatigued that he could still get on the podium at least, which is amazing. Yeah, that is amazing. Looking at May on the calendar, you can see I've put Belgian Mountain Bike Challenge in there. That would be my first
goal like that would be my first really important race that is a great race by the way if you want to experience real European racing that is a really good race yeah like you know you get all of those crazy elements you get all the muddy tree rooty rock short climbs short downhills
and repeat that for four hours. It is insanely good. That is one of my favorite races ever. Sounds like mountain bike Flanders. I think that sounds awesome. Yeah. I did this race, I think, 2019. And at that time, that was one of my best races ever. I got some...
Good results and good performances out of that race. And what actually helped me a lot was that I was in Belgium. I was not in Spain. So we had rain, we had wind, we had cold, we had all kinds of shitty weather that unfortunately for me, I do perform the best in.
As we've seen this year, yeah. Yeah, as we've seen. There's no getting away from it. It's just, you know, the worse the weather, the better for me. Performance-wise, definitely not mentally. But that was a really good race. And we had Mathieu van der Poel racing as well. He won all of the stages and the overall and everything. He was insanely good. And it was fun, actually.
Racing there because we had every stage started off doing a we rode up maybe what was it maybe a five or six minutes climb on road so it's kind of just a really good way to spread out the group and we would do this climb every day at 400-420 watts like all the time we would just go on really fast and he would be there like
at the front. And he would be looking back just to, you know, take a good look at the group and see how things are going. And it was almost like he was a group leader and trying to, like, he would be like a...
What do you call it? Oh, like a tour guide. Scouts. Oh, yeah. Like a troop leader or something. Something like that. And he would be looking back almost to count, like, is everybody here? Yeah. And then he would just make a decision and just right away. And just leave everybody there. It was amazing just seeing that.
I would be doing my best ever effort and he would just go because he just wanted to go. So he would do the stage alone. That was his decision and we would just have to accept it. Insane. I've heard in the women's pro peloton that racing with Annie Mack van Vluten is like that. It's like, oh yeah, she's gone, we can have a bike race now.
Oh yeah, yeah. Let's just wait until she leaves and then we can do our own thing. Yeah, so I think if that's your real first A-Race of the season, I think actually we've got a lot more time to get you into really good form. And I think that means that we can actually focus a little more on kind of the strength training and we can actually...
keep that in through early season. We can keep that top end moving up. On the back of that, make sure you're recovering from all that and that you're still getting in the good volume and that those aren't impacting each other in terms of fatigue. Once we get to March and April, we can really sharpen you up. I think that as long as you can just
you know keep riding keep the training load high once we get past that last training camp in April you know you know you can take take a little rest early May and then you know take a week to get your legs back under you and then I think I think you can have a really really good Belgian challenge yeah that would be awesome yeah and then then a little bit of rest obviously and then
Yeah, I mean, by that point, the local season will have started. And as usual, I will have that automatic feeling of doing every race. I mean, that is something I really have to shake off because I can show up for every race because I also am a multidiscipline rider. So there's just so many races I can do. And I kind of have to...
forced myself to pick some and not all of them. But yeah, we will have some races, some local races at that point. And obviously in June, we will have road and time trial nationals. Yeah, there's a lot of local racing going on there. But yeah, obviously we have some Eurochamps.
in June and August. But that's really the only races I've put up. I'm sure there will be other races, like international races, I will be interested in, but I haven't really been able to look that far into the season. Yeah. Well, I think bringing us into mid to late May,
as this is more or less how it's going to go. We can then reassess kind of late May, early June because by then we'll have the rest of the calendar because it's a little early for obviously planning out what's going to happen next September, October or whatever. But I think next season, again, if...
If your season really does end in late September, early October, I think that's going to put us in an even better spot for the following year, as long as your family obligations don't have you retiring. Yeah, to be honest, we'll just have to take it one year at a time. There are obviously some external factors that I have to think about.
At some point, I might have some changes in my contracts, sponsorship related things. But until then, I will keep doing this as much as possible. So for me, it's really focusing on one year at a time and just doing everything I can while I still can.
Yeah. Yeah. And I think kind of COVID and how last year shook out actually put us in, you know, accidentally because I was kind of thinking one year at a time too, but it just happens that it has a really good multi-year progression because typically, you know, when you think about somebody who is potentially you think is not fully tapped, like I initially still think about yours.
You know, you tend to think in multi-year cycles, or at least I do in a couple of coaches I know. So I think, you know, this year is going to be looking really good for kind of like a good, you know, up and down kind of two good peak year. And then if you actually get a chance to like start your rest at the end of the year in like October, that's going to be awesome as opposed to this year, you know, starting your rest in like November. Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I think we knew that at some point, but it was just that kind of a year where things were happening really late and I just had to roll with it. Yeah. Yeah, obviously the race performances were, to me, they were worth it. You know, I had some of my best ever races in late season.
The past, well, the last three or four races were definitely some of the best races I've done. So in that regard, I think it's worth it. But of course, it came at a cost, which is, of course, starting the preparation for next year, super late. Like it's December already, and I feel like I'm doing nothing.
If I'm completely honest, I am slightly worried about it, but luckily for me, I have a coach who knows more than I do about this, so I just have to believe in it. Well, that's very flattering. Well, I think when you said that Belgian Mountain Bike Challenge in mid-May was your first real A race,
I stopped being nervous. I know we're looking at Christmas and you're getting nervous like, oh my god, I haven't done a 20 hour week on the bike yet. And I'm thinking, oh man, that's a breather.
We've got six months. You're going to be fine. Yeah, we have six months. I keep repeating that to myself that the season is May, June, July, August. It is not March and April. As I said, this year, last season, I kind of had this feeling that I was in my best shape in early April.
Which is weird. I would like that feeling in June. So I'm trying to tell myself that if I am starting the preparation a little bit later, that might mean that I will be at my best a little bit later, which is when I really need it. So let's hope for that. And of course, I mean, I know we're not looking too far into the year, but another really big A race is the
Marathon Cross Country World Championships in September, September 17th. There we go. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. I can't, I don't remember if I told you this, but what makes this race is special is that it's in Denmark. It is as close to being at home as possible. That's fantastic. Yeah. I mean, that is actually a really good thing. I mean, we will.
I will go out on a limb and say we will never have a world championships in Iceland at least not while I'm living but we'll see maybe I don't think it's gonna happen so Denmark having lived there for two years this is as close to home as it gets so to me it kind of feels like racing worlds at home which is great
And given that I have a really good standing in the world rankings, this has potential to be my best world championships. So I'm really excited about it. And this is when I would really like to be at my absolute best. Yeah, I think that actually gives us plenty of time between...
plenty of time between May and June and September and especially since at the moment at least your race season is looking fairly light until then I think that's going to be actually a pretty easy ask because you know last year like we like we've talked about perpetually for seven or eight months is you know the the balance between the racing and the fatigue and the recovery and the training so
With something this open, it really becomes, do you need a little more racing to have your best legs that day? So that's something that we can think about a little later. Yeah, yeah, definitely. Another thing worth mentioning is European champs. That would be a tough one because I have the opportunity to do
European Champs on the road, in the time trial, and on the mountain bike in one week. Have you heard about this? That the European, what's it called? UEC and the UCI, they are both working on this idea of making this kind of European games and world games. I have not heard about this yet, but that's very interesting.
Okay, so the basic idea is that they're getting a lot of disciplines into a single venue. So I think for the Worlds, this will be done in 2023 for the first time in Glasgow, Scotland. And they will do road, time trial, cross country, and track, and I think downhill at the same time. That's fascinating.
Yeah, this is like almost everything. Pretty much. I mean, they do leave out some things that would not make sense to do, like cross-country marathon wouldn't really make sense to do at the same time. It's just difficult to put it there, like geographically, I think.
And, yeah, they're leaving some things out, but, you know, putting road disciplines and mountain bike disciplines into one single event is big. And I can't wait to see what a guy like Mathieu Andrupoul thinks about that. It must be a big headache for him. Well, he strikes me as somebody who's going to kind of...
do what's fun. And if he's like, oh, well, I feel like doing this today and maybe I'll do this race and that, you know, he'll, he'll do that and he'll probably crush both of them or all three or four or whatever he's going to do. It wouldn't surprise me to see him do downhill and, and, you know, five. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, uh, the, the, the, the whole mountain biking world has been waiting for years to, to, to see Nino Schurter try downhill. You know, it's a, everybody keeps thinking, what if.
He is such a good descender on a cross-country bike, but we never really get the answer to the question, how would he do on a downhill bike? Just everybody wants to know. So I would love to see Machu Van Der Poel on a downhill bike. I'm not sure if his team would allow him. Well, I think after his crash on his back at the Olympics...
I think maybe they might be a little nervous about letting him do that. Yeah, it does raise some questions. I think we had that with Steve Bar and Quickstep. They were a little bit nervous about having him do cross races because he's an investment. They just didn't want to ruin their investment by doing some cyclocross. Who wants to do that?
Was it the year he was reigning cyclocross world champion? He won Roubaix? I'm going to screw this up, aren't I? Yeah, he had some really, really impressive results. And didn't he lose his teeth in a road racing accident, actually? I think so, yeah. He's got a bridge in it. I remember one year watching Paris Roubaix. I was like, it looks like Stebar turned into an old man in the last cobbled sector. And it turns out his bridge had actually fallen out of the cobbled.
Yeah, that was pretty, that was hard to look at. Yeah, I mean, people keep comparing a guy like Stebar to Menard and Van Der Poel and thinking that what if he had done more cross, you know, with road racing, but I think it's a pretty bad comparison.
Not everybody is built for doing all these disciplines. Just look at what one art right now. Did you see the Super Prestige on Saturday? I didn't get a chance to watch it because I had to work and I was saving my time for watching F1 on Sunday. But yeah, he won by a country mile with...
Taken to Digger. I saw the gifs of him falling on his face. There's nothing more classic cyclocross than that. Yeah, but even though you know how it went, you really should watch that race. It's just a masterclass. I don't think anybody like kids today, they would be looking at that thinking, oh yeah, I should do all the disciplines as well.
Maybe then I will become like Wout. But I think it's an exception. Well, I mean, people who can do both cyclocross and road are, I mean, people who can perform at a high level in cyclocross. I think a couple of years ago, there was a trope or some kind of received wisdom that
that if you're going to race cyclocross or criteriums or something you need a really good sprint and aerobically it's not that important and I was always saying you know aerobically it's as important if not more so to be at a high level in a cyclocross race because aerobically you have to recover from those efforts and when they
transferred to the road and started winning things. I didn't say anything. I wasn't like, haha, I was right. But I was doing that in my head, actually. But yeah, it definitely takes a superior genetic specimen to do everything.
And I, you know, I want to, I want to get those guys into a lab and poke them and prod them and take muscle biopsies. And I want to look at their training schedules and I want to look at their development over the years. And yeah, who doesn't ask? Yeah, that's true. Yeah, it's just, there's just some things that like I've seen because I've raised those guys. No, I would say I would, I have, I have done races.
I've done the same races as then. I have not raced them. But you get my point. Like I've been doing, I remember if I can say, if I can tell you a really short story, I remember the first cyclocross European champs. That was my last race before I got hit by a motorbike in late June, not June, late 2015. I think it was November.
and that was a season when Van Der Poel was world champion and he had his knee problems from the summer so he hadn't been racing at all and he decided to skip Euros and skip a lot of the early season races but because of the location of the race he was living really close by
Because it was so close by, he came out during some of the training days. I think it was the day before the elite race. And he came out just to say hi to the guys and show off his jersey and whatever. And there was this moment. I was doing a hot lap on the course. I had been training all of the sections. I had a really good feeling about this. And I was doing my usual hot lap the day before the race.
and while I'm doing my hot lap like we have these grass straights and 180 degree corners just typical cyclocross stuff nothing too special but you know something that you really just have to put a really good effort into and I was doing that and as I was doing that I'm passed by one guy I'm not sure who is but he was wearing a Belgian national
Team Jersey, and I'm passed by Van Der Poel, Rainbow Jersey. And they are riding their bikes, and they're just having a conversation. And Van Der Poel has one hand on the handlebar and the other, he's holding his phone, and he's probably looking for a photo or something. And they catch me and they drop me while I'm doing the fastest lap I can possibly do. Like, I could have...
I could have easily just stopped doing whatever I was doing and just, you know, I should really just stop racing. It was incredible. It's like I really got this feeling of how much better they are. You know, it's just they're doing an easy ride. They're just having a conversation. Zone one, whatever. And I'm out there trying my hardest. That was insane.
Yeah, and, you know, it's like they've got – they're so comfortable in that terrain and they're so genetically gifted. And, you know, I think that's one of the interesting things is that – to point out with this kind of stuff is, you know, you're still getting faster, you know, years into training. And, you know, they seem to have just shot straight up to their maximum potential or near maximum potential and just kind of hovered there.
I think it's interesting that some people can still get there and they just need to put in years of work and some people will just fly straight there I think people relate a lot to the difference of whatever definition you have of natural talent and whether some people do have it or they just have to put in
years and years of work so I've always put myself into that camp of like thinking I don't really have talent I just put in a lot of work you know so that just takes a lot of time but the good thing about it is that if you put in the work then you always get these progressions every year it's a little bit better so you always you're constantly motivated to do
another year just like that because you will get better. You know, you don't really plateau. You don't really, you know, you don't become like a 19-year-old world champion and it's like, oh yeah, that is my absolute best and I'll just stay here for 10 years or something like that. You know, I, yeah, I just, I like the idea of every, every year getting a little bit better than last year.
Yeah. Well, I mean, when we started working together, I was looking at your previous numbers and that was one of the things that I really liked about you is that you can see the progression every year. Like, you know, every year, you know, for the first three or four years, starting with 2012, 2013, you know, your CTL, which I just use as a stand-in for, you know, average training hours, you know, it starts at 103.
Peek, and then it's 109, then it's 122, 128, you know, a couple years later, 140, and, you know, last two years, you've peaked around 160, 170. And that's, you know, that's that kind of progression that, you know, and the thing is, I wonder, I wonder what those guys too, are, do we just not see this progression, even though it's there, and they've definitely worked hard for it, because, you know, for somebody like me, it just suddenly they appeared one day.
and it's like Sven Nies who's that look at these two new kids yeah like that that's that's where I um that was I just they were just suddenly existed and you know actually your story reminds me of um there's um I'm gonna reveal myself to be the true metal head that I am uh there's a drumming video from Meshuggah um their drummer on the song Clockworks okay and it's a drumming playthrough and it's
He's doing like nine different time signatures with four limbs all at once. And it's so amazing to watch this guy drum. Whether you like the music or not, it's relevant. But the first or second comment down below is, this video has inspired me to give up drumming. Yes. It is too good. You'll never be this good.
Exactly. And I heard another story from somebody where one of the world's best drummers, Danny Carey from Tool, was watching a Meshuggah concert and he was doing the same like, oh my god, kind of stuff that everybody else does. So I like to think about Van Der Poel and Van Aert watching each other and going, oh my god, how did he do that? That's amazing. And just kind of fanboying out over each other. I imagine that. Yeah, I think
I think they have this really good dynamic of being like, you know, I've gotten the feeling of them not really being the best of friends, but they have this insane amount of respect for each other, like professional respect. So I think they just watch each other and think, oh, wow, I want to do that. And I want to do a little bit better than that. And they just constantly one up each other.
And yeah, that's how they get better. Because I bet, like, again, you should really watch that race from last Saturday. I definitely will now, for sure. Just look at all the other guys. They're like beginners. You know, full respect to those guys because they are some of the best in the world. But then along comes one who is just like he is at a completely different level. And I bet.
that Matthew Van Der Poel watched that race and he was thinking, wow, wow, I need to be really good when I make my own return, you know? So definitely somebody has come along and set the standard for the coming weeks because, yeah, if an artist is that good, then Van Der Poel needs to be better. And it's like, wow, how can you do that?
I mean, actually, I think that's one of those blessings in disguise, his crash and his recovery, is that a lot of the time, that's the kind of rest that a lot of professional cyclists, especially multidisciplined ones who do cyclocross, just really never get. I remember talking with Adam Meyerson once after a local race, we were riding back together, and we were talking about
you know just regular strength training and kind of doing enough you know in the off season to you know just basically take care of your body and he was like I've never really had a chance to do that because as soon as you're done with cross season you got to get in shape for road season as soon as you're done with road season you got to get in shape for cross season oh yeah that's tough yeah um and I you know I
I follow his social media like anybody. I remember after he retired, there was a picture of him in the gym and I was like, yeah, Adam, woo, get into the gym, get healthy, yeah. Yeah, I mean, he finally had the time to do that. And less pressure and, you know, all that stuff. And you see it all the time. People, you know, writers who have reached really high levels and then they retire and suddenly they're happy.
And, you know, they're doing different things and they go on and on about, like on Instagram, they go on about how they're just super happy these days. And you have to think, like, were you not happy when you were racing? Like, were you unhappy? How is this? Because, you know, as they say, sport is not really healthy.
What goes wrong when you have to retire to get happy again? I think you're starting to experience some of the things that make people retire, fatherhood and having a family. I can imagine if you're out on a six, eight hour training ride, you're like, man, I wonder if I miss my daughter's first steps or something like that.
Definitely. I had that feeling like it came out of nowhere, to be honest. It really snuck up on me. I think I was in Spain. I think it was my France and Spain trip in October. And I would just be doing nothing. And I started thinking, whew, I want to be at home. I would really like to be with my family right now. Yeah.
You know, I'm in France. Sun is out. Everything is awesome. I'm about to do a really cool race. And, you know, everything is great. Life is awesome. I'm doing what I love to do. But I still got that feeling of, yeah, I would love to be at home right now. So that kind of just sneaks up on you. But I think...
I think if there's a balance to these things, then of course they can all work out together. Yeah, I think so. And I hope this year that we can strike some kind of balance between Ingvar the family man and Ingvar the professional cyclist. Yeah, I think I'm optimistic about it. I'm definitely not giving up before we give it a go.
You know, it's just something that we have to try and see what happens, see how it goes. Like I said before, like I said a few days ago, if I can't do a 15 to 20 hour week when I'm not even doing, well, yeah, when that's pretty much all I do on the bike, then I'm definitely doing something wrong. I should be able to do 15 to 20 hour weeks.
Anyway. Yeah, well, I mean, you know, well, you're right, because that is your job. Otherwise, you'd be in an office for 40 hours a week. That's it. Yeah, that's it. So I should be able to do that, like, logically. Yeah, but, you know, sometimes you've got to take trips and you've got to race and you've got to be away from home. And, you know, I think that is one of the things that, you know.
like we said does get people to retire at some point or just step away from the professional racing aspect of things but you know I think I think I've seen other people like I think who was it who's that great sprinter the German Marcel Kittel yeah yeah I think I think he said he was just completely over trained and
I cannot imagine being overtrained to such a degree that you don't just take some time off and say, hey, I want to race later. I don't care what you say. I'm a top sprinter. You're going to listen to me. Go from thinking that's the right conclusion to I'm just going to be done. The depth of overtraining that must be in his legs. Yeah, I remember that when he suddenly stopped, like a full stop.
Just not even, and of course, Tom Dumoulin did kind of the same thing, but he's coming back. Yeah, which is amazing to me, yeah. It is amazing, and his performance at the Olympics was also pretty amazing, but yeah, I mean, those guys, they must have dug themselves a really deep hole to suddenly just want to completely stop doing, you know, their favorite thing in the world. Yeah, I mean, I think
I cannot imagine the kind of pressures that those guys are under. And the women, too, who I'm sure that it's happened to that we don't even know about. Just because I think you've got sponsors' obligations and you've got team obligations. I cannot imagine that most professional cyclists are in a place to say, this is what I want my race schedule to be. I think maybe Pogacar is...
Roglic gets to decide on that and team and coaches and have a big meeting about it, I would imagine. I don't know. Sure, I think so. But I think a lot of other people, it's like, well, you need to be here, you need to be here, you need to be here. And I think if that was your 2021,
And alongside you, I would have felt the same pressure to get you on the bike and get training. And I think that would have put you right in the hole and you would be bowing out right now instead of looking at 2022 or speculation. But I could imagine that being possible. Yeah, I think so too. One of the things I'm really enjoying right now is the freedom I have to choose what I do. I get to be my own manager.
That is definitely a lot more work. I mean, I'm not saying it's no work. You know, trying to figure all these things out by myself is a lot of work. But as long as I'm good at it and I know what I'm doing, then I also have that freedom to decide just like we are doing now. Maybe we are deciding to not race in January. Maybe racing in February is better. But if I were on any team,
Doesn't matter what team, they might just say, no, you're racing in January. And I'm like, oh, okay, I'm not too excited about that, but yeah, gotta follow orders. Yeah, that's true. Well, one of my pros had, one of my pro mountain bikers had that happen to him this past year, and one of my pro roadies had that happen this past year also, where it was like, you know, a lot of pressure to be in shape.
constantly. And it's like, well, how come you weren't in your best shape this week? Because I was in really good shape like three weeks ago, and I've just been tired. Yeah. I mean, a good manager doesn't necessarily have the best understanding of how the body works. They might be really good at planning stuff, planning flights and hotels and whatever, but if
Obviously you're never going to be in your peak fitness for the whole year. You have to understand that. I've seen some similar type stuff with the lower to mid tier of the US pro racing where I've seen a lot of decisions get made that are made
because it's clearly better and easier for team management rather than what's good for the riders. Yeah. Which is just, it breaks your heart to watch it happen. Yeah, but it's very common. It's, yeah, it's just, you know, part of the sport. Something that happens. And I think, you know, you learned...
A couple good lessons this past year too with knowing that you need an Airbnb with a kitchen and being able to prepare your own food. Because if you don't have a – which race was it? I forget. You got up – I've never seen your Instagram post. You grew up at like 4 a.m. to go make your race start. You didn't have a chance to get breakfast. No, that was Latramoon in Girona. That was definitely something I thought.
I made a huge mistake by picking a hotel because, you know, in retrospect, of course, it feels like something I should have known. But yeah, of course, a hotel is not going to provide breakfast at 4 or 3.30 in the morning. So I had to improvise, but that was something that came down on my performance, I think. I just had a really...
a really bad day. As I told you when we talked about that race, I felt better in the last half than the first half just because I was filling up on gels as per our conversation in Spain. I had a lot of stuff in my pockets and I started just getting a little bit better throughout the day, but it sucks to blame that.
Blame a bad performance on the place I decided to stay in, but lesson learned, you know, it's, yeah, I think that is something I learned from and that bad spot I put myself in in early June, that was also something that's hard to forget, you know, and something I really just don't want to do again.
Yeah. Those bad moments, you know, when we think about them in retrospect, they're so valuable to teach us these things. And, you know, I remember, you know, I was in my mid-20s and I was, you know, bitching about something to somebody and they were like, well, look, it's your experiences so far that got you here and I think you're in a good place and I think you would agree. And so, you know, what can you do? You can't really regret.
you can't change anything that happened. You can just learn from it. And so, you know, and that's, that's something that I think is, it's like now, whenever I go to a track, I time, how long is it from the, from the track side to the bathroom? So if I know it's a two minute walk and it's, you know, a minute to take a piss and then it's a two minute walk back. I know I've got five minutes and I,
If I've got a match sprint coming up or if I'm coaching somebody with something coming up, I'll be like, do you have to go to the bathroom? It's not a question you normally ask people unless you're in a car. It's one of those things where I learned early on, oh, we need to have this figured out. Exactly. That is definitely experience. That is not something you would think about in the first time.
First race you ever do, you wouldn't really be thinking about how far is it to the toilet. Yeah. Definitely wouldn't be timing it. Yeah. Now, as people are experiencing, the pre-race poop, everybody jokes about it because everybody knows exactly that same feeling. You get a little extra movement in the guts the morning with the nerves. Everybody knows this now. But that first race, you have no idea. And then you're on the start line. If you haven't thought about it, it's like, uh-oh.
Yeah, exactly. But at that point, after that happens, then it's the decision you have to make, you know, if you're going to learn something from this experience or not. I mean, there's plenty of mistakes you can do, and you just shrug it off and keep going. And you can make the same mistake again, because you didn't really decide to learn something from it.
Yeah. Well, and that's one of the things that I really appreciate about you is that you have this very organized attitude about your training and racing. And I think that really complements my coaching style because we're both – because I obviously can't do my job without –
The feedback I get from you and you give me really excellent feedback when it's conversations like this that really make me go, oh, okay, everything's going to be fine. Well, that is good to know. Yeah, I think I just have a really good understanding of how important feedback is. Because I have, especially during like in December or like, no, let's just look at like last.
January, last February, I had questions in my head all the time, like about what we were doing. And most of them were like, just curiosity, because I was feeling good. And I think I things were going well. And I just kept thinking about things that, you know, can we improve this even more and stuff like that, you know, not, not no negative questions, you know, just just to say that out loud. But
That is definitely related to my own feeling of reviewing my performance after each ride. You know, I'm always thinking back, like, how is that? Was that a good one or not? So I think that really helps with being able to give good feedback if you are, how do you say, critical of your own performance. Yeah.
Because it would be so easy to just go through the workouts and just do what I think is good. And then I'm done. I get off the bike, take a shower, and just keep going with my life. But I'm still thinking about it afterwards. I'm constantly thinking, was it perfect? Or could I have done even better? Something like that. Yeah. Well, and the questions you asked,
and you still ask are always excellent. And I think it makes me think more critically about what's going on and what's the recent and far past and recent and far future. But I think it's also good that it gives you more of an understanding about
You know, kind of my approach to this and, you know, kind of we, you know, we kind of meet in the middle. And I think that's, I think that's a really good approach. And, you know, you coach people too. So, you know, I'm sure that helps give you that, that extra bit of perspective, you know, when, when the coach becomes the coached, it's, you know, it's very different. And, you know, I think it's also like, it also shows that you have this attitude when,
when you learn things about Airbnb over hotel and stuff like that. I think Tim Cusick says it's an iterative thing where you take the lessons you're learning from recently and you apply it to the future. It changes year to year. It's never exactly the same because you learn things and you go, oh, we can improve by this. We can improve by this.
This must be something that also helps you as a coach. All these experiences and questions and stuff that happens. It's just a lot more experience for yourself, isn't it? Yeah, it is. It helps me with recognizing the commonalities between people and also recognizing the individualities between people.
where some things I'll think, okay, this is common between all athletes and this is common between all pro athletes and this is common between all amateur athletes or whatever spectrum exists in between. But then I'll think, oh, well, this person, this is different. This person, this is different. And it really makes me appreciate just everybody.
Yeah, it's always about how you respond to stuff like that. Obviously, people are different in that way where you would have some people you always have to motivate to do another race, but at the same time, you would have another one who you would have to tell, do you have to race as much as you do?
Can you race less? That's completely different. So, yeah, people are just different like that. So, where were we? I was going to say, it's 10 o'clock, I'm exhausted. Yeah, it's been good.
I mean, I definitely had some questions about where we were headed with the next weeks or months. I mean, I'm just curious about what we're doing in broad terms. I kind of like, just to tell you, I kind of like this idea of having not a
perfect vision of the future in terms of training peaks workouts. Like I always see one week ahead and I kind of like part of me doesn't like that and a part of me likes that. Because as I said, I am kind of a square and the square in me definitely does not like that. But going back to that VO2 max block.
I kind of like that I never knew I would be doing this for three weeks because I felt after the first week like, oh, wow, that was an insane week. And then open up training peaks and I see, yeah, I'm doing it again.
Just exactly the same? Yeah, it's pretty much exactly the same. And after that, I thought, oh, I'm going to get another one. And I did. All right. All right. Let's just do it. Yeah. So in a way, it does help, you know, because I have no way of...
Pre-overpacing myself if I know too far into the future that things are going to get even more difficult. If I only see one session at a time, I would always do that all out because I have no idea if after that comes an easy day or not. One week at a time is good, but at the same time, I have to say that I'm still really curious about
What does the future look like beyond that week? Yeah, well, what I've been doing since Training Peaks implemented the notes feature is I've been going through people's schedules once we know what the goal races are and if it's kind of being in shape for all season, you know, so be it. If it's this peak, this peak, okay, cool. And then what I've been doing is I've been going out and sketching out the training phases. Okay.
So it'll be notes like, okay, strength is going to be this, and then riding, we're going to do this, and then we're going to start incorporating this type of training, and then you'll go here, and then you'll do this, then it'll be rest, then yada, yada, yada. So that's what I've been doing. And so I think it's a good vision of the future, but it's not exactly planned out because early in my coaching career, I would plan out like a month of workouts or even longer.
and I would have to go rewrite it twice a week sometimes. So it gets difficult to do like that but at the same time it's maximum flexibility to plan week to week but also like because I had always done all the planning in my head based on when somebody had to be in shape and whether you remember what it was last time or not like the
you know the periodization always looks the same more or less once we know where somebody's at and where they need to be in shape and so I could just fill that in real quick and it left a lot of people going hey coach what are we doing the next couple weeks or months and then I would explain it to them they go oh that sounds great and so putting it in training peaks now in the notes has actually been really really good and so once we have a conversation like this or you know once somebody lets me know this is my goal then I can
Go through training piece and kind of add in some very general kind of phase guidelines. And that seems to help a lot. So now that we've had this conversation, I can definitely do that. But that's going to be tomorrow morning because it's late and I'm very tired. And I'm going to screw it up if I try to do it tonight. Yeah, no stress. I mean, that's just good to know. I mean, it does sound like a really good way to do these things. You know, just like big picture stuff instead of focusing on the details too far down the road.
Yeah, and the details, they matter, but they also don't matter because you don't know what to fill in for the details until you know how somebody's reacting to this training block or et cetera, et cetera, the fatigue level or the home stress level. And so, yeah, I find this is a good compromise to kind of make a sketch. It's easy to change a sketch around. It's hard to rewrite 100 workouts. Definitely, yeah.
I think that applies to a lot of things. I think so too, yes. Alright, Ingvar, great call as always. I could talk to you forever, but I'm getting the eyes from across the desk that it's time to go to sleep soon. Alright, say hello from me.
I'm sorry. No worries. Say hello to your daughter and your girlfriend for me. Will do.
All right, so that's our show for today. Thank you, Ingvar, for coming on the show. Thanks, or rather, thanks for letting me record our season review and planning call. And everybody listening, so if you want to check us out on Instagram, Ingvar is IngvarOM on Instagram, and I am Empirical Cycling, as you might have expected. And so you probably want to check out Ingvar. He put some really cool stuff up there. Iceland is a really beautiful country, and also he's a 27-time national champion, so he's well worth a follow.
Check him out and check me out on Instagram. We've got some AMAs and the stories coming up this weekend. And also email me at empiricalcyclingatgmail.com for any coaching or consultation inquiries. And if you have questions or comments on the show, if you thought this was really cool to listen to, let me know. If you thought it was not cool to listen to, also let me know. Or I guess the listen numbers will just speak for themselves.
Again, if you want to donate to the show, remember we are ad-free and I have indeed been turning down some advertising offers for the show the last couple weeks. So your donations really mean a lot to us. So thank you everybody and we're going to keep that rolling. So that's at empiricalcycling.com slash donate and we will see you all in the next episode.